Fischer, L.R., 1986. Linked Lives: Adult daughters and their mothers. , Harper and Row, New York.

Shows that getting married disrupts personal networks

Leigh, L.A. and Grady, K., 1985. Changes in mothers' social networks and social support following divorce. Journal of Marriage and the Family 47, pp. 663ñ67.

Shows that getting divorced disrupts personal networks

Anderson, T.B., 1984. Widowhood as a life transition: its impact on kinship ties. Journal of Marriage and the Family 46, pp. 105ñ114.

Morgan, D.L., 1989. Adjusting to widowhood: do social networks really make it easier?. Gerontologist 29, pp. 101ñ107. View Record in Scopus 

Morgan, D.L. and March, S.J., 1992. The impact of life events on networks of personal relationships: a comparison of widowhood and caring for a spouse with alzheimer's disease. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 9, pp. 563ñ58.

Shows that losing a spouse disrupts social networks.


Gottlieb, B.H. and Pancer, S.M., 1988. Social networks and the transition to parenthood. In: Michaels, G.Y. and Goldberg, W.A., Editors, 1988. The transition to parenthood: current theory and research, Cambridge University, NY.

McCannell, K., 1987. Social networks and the transition to motherhood. In: Milardo, R., Editor, , 1987. Families and Social Networks, Sage, Beverly Hills.

Belsky, J. and Rovine, M., 1984. Social-network contact, family support, and the transition to parenthood. Journal of Marriage and the Family 46, pp. 455ñ462.

Shows that having a child disrupts social networks


Larson, J.H., 1984. The effect of husband's unemployment on marital and family relations in blue-collar families. Family Relations 33, pp. 503ñ511. Full Text via CrossRef

Larson, J.H., Wilson, S.M. and Beley, R., 1994. The impact of job insecurity on marital and family relationships. Family Relations 43, pp. 138ñ143.

Newman, K.S., 1988. Falling from grace: the experience of downward mobility in the American middle class. , Free Press, NY.

Shows that becoming unemployed disrupts social networks.


Marsden, P., 1988. Homogeneity in confiding relationships. Social Networks 10, pp. 57ñ76. 



Suitor, J.J., 1987. Friendship networks in transition: married mothers return to school. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 4, pp. 445ñ461.

Educational transitions dirupts social networks


Bell, R.R., 1981. World of friendship. , Sage, Beverly Hills

Lazarsfeld, P.F. and Merton, R.K., 1954. Friendship as a social process: a substantive and methodological analysis. In: Berger, M. et al., 1954. Freedom and Control in Modern Society, Litton, New York, pp. 18ñ66.

Merton 1968 STSS

classic homophily cites



Connidis, I.A. and Davies, L., 1990. Confidants and companions in later life: the place of family and friends. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 45, pp. S141ñS149

Kinship and socializing


References for lack of stability  "more than half of the associates...named at T1 were not named again at either T2 or T3" (Suitor and Keeton 1997: 57).

"It is worth noting that the effect of kinship status and closeness were consistent with cross-sectional studies of network functioning, suggesting that these factors affect maintanance of networks much the same way that they affect netwroks at any one point in time.  Closeness at T1 was, overall, the variable that best predicted whether associates would continue to be sources of support and socializing.  Further, kin were more likely than non-kin to continue to provide both types of emotional support, but were less likely to continue as memberss of the active networks of socializers"  (Suitor and Keeton 1997: 59-60).

"...change in marital status had relatively little effect on the continuity of ties, in contrast to what the literature on divorce suggests" (Suitor and Keeton 1997: 60).

"The findings presented here contribute to a long line of research demonstrating the importance of status similarity for structuring interpersonal networks. What is unique about the present findings is that they show how changes in similarity that are produced by status transitions can have long-term consequences for interpersonal relationships. Further, they demonstrate that it is not merely homophily in general that structures relationships, but homophily that is salient for particular social network functions. Specifically, for the returning students whom we studied across the 10-year period, associates' educational attainment was important in explaining which associates continued to be sources of support for the women's school and work roles; however, this dimension of similarity did not help to explain which associates continued to be sources of general emotional support or socializing" (Suitor and Keeton 1997: 60).

Feld, S.L., 1984. The structured use of personal associates. Social Forces 62, pp. 640ñ652

Wellman, B. and Wortley, S., 1989. Brothers' keepers: situating kinship relations in broader networks of social support. Sociological Perspectives 32, pp. 273ñ306. 

"Specificity hypothesis"

"In most approaches to measuring personal networks, the goal has been to take the best possible 'snapshot' of the network at a particular point in time. This approach implicitly assumes that there is something reasonably fixed and stable ('the network') that can be captured and represented. But this ignores the instability in the set of people with whom we interact, as the membership in our networks is continually in flux. This instability is an important but little understood feature of personal networks"  (Morgan et al 1996:  9).

Instability in the network's membership is not the same as unreliability in a measurement device. Nor is instability the same as true change in the network. Saying that a network has changed means that people who had routinely been present in the network now no longer are, and vice versa. But saying that the network has some degree of instability challenges the very predicability of who will be named in the network at any given point. Is a friend who is seen at a yearly business meeting or a cousin who visits only occasionally truly 'out of the network' when no active contact is occurring? And does the naming of such people during brief periods of meaningful contact really mean that the network has changed? More realistically,
recognizing the existence of instability means that we expect a certain amount of 'coming and going' in the membership of most personal networks  (Morgan et al 1996:  10).

At least two prior research traditions have recognized the importance of instability in the membership of personal networks. First, the ongoing research program of Bernard and his collaborators (Bernard et al., 1987, Bernard et al., 1990; Killworth et ai., 1990) distinguishes between the smaller set of active ties found via traditional survey procedures for network elicitation and the much larger set of acquaintances that are inactive at any given time, and thus less accessible in conventional measurement techniques...The second research tradition examines networks that go beyond the limited number of ties that are active at any one point in time (Gurvitch, 1961; Pool and Kochen, 1978).  By organizing data from network diaries as a cumulative count of the number of people in the network, Pool and Kochen generated growth curves that rose quite sharply at first, based on the large number of active ties who were first encountered near the beginning of the recording period, and then tapered off to a much slower growth rate, based on a decline in the number of less active or latent ties that were newly encountered. Continuing, such a growth curve over a year or so of diary keeping leads to an asymptotic estimate of the diary keeper's total acquaintance volume. While the bulk of these ties are located in the early phase of diary keeping, the total number of ties is much higher than the number that would be located at any one time" (Morgan et al 1996:  10)

The results "...point to a considerable degree of instability in who is present in the network over time. In particular, the average overlap rate of 55% means that just over half of those who were named in one interview or the other appeared in both. Similarly, interpreting the average phi value of 0.34 as a test-retest correlation indicates only a limited ability to predict who was in the network from one time to the next" (Morgan et al 1996:  14).

"Thus, despite the instability in network membership over time, the number of people named was quite stable across interviews. A similar pattern occurs in Table 2(b), with almost the same stability in the percentage of the network who were family members...Taken together, the results from Tables 1 and 2 show that the structural properties of these personal networks were more stable than their membership. To see why the characteristics of the network as a whole should persist, despite considerable circulation in the ties that make up the network, we need to examine the stability of the individual ties more closely (Morgan et al 1996:  16).

We thus conclude that the stability of the aggregate features of personal network depends upon the underlying core-periphery structure of the network's membership. Although some personal networks may achieve aggregate stability through the interchangeability of peripheral ties, it seems that these weaker ties are more variable than core ties. If each elicitation of a personal network includes a 'sample' from this relatively large pool of highly variable ties, then this will contribute to instability in the network's aggregate characteristics. An obvious corollary is that we will find higher levels of aggregate stability in networks that are largely composed of those core ties who reappear across measurement points (Morgan et al 1996:  22).

Hammer, M., 1983. ëCoreí and ëextendedí social networks in relation to health and illness. Social Science and Medicine 17, pp. 405ñ411. 

"Core versus extended networks"